DM-41309: Describe how to build pipelines package with pip (#643)
lsst-dm/dm_dev_guide: stack/building-with-pip.rst

###################################
Making Your Package pip Installable
###################################

By default a science pipelines package will be configured to work with SCons and EUPS but not with ``pip``.
If the package does not include C++ code and does not depend on any of the C++ packages, such as ``afw`` or ``daf_base`` then it is possible to make the package installable with ``pip`` as well as with SCons.

> 

Reviewer: When should developers/package owners choose to make their package pip-installable?  What criteria should be considered?  Does the DM-CCB have to approve?

Author: This needs some discussion. We might want to say that a package should be pip-installable if it can be pip-installable and it should go on PyPI if it can go there. For science pipelines most packages can't be pip-installable and can't go on PyPI.

.. note::

  C++ packages can be built with ``pip`` but when packages are built this way they can't easily be used as dependencies for C++ code from other packages.

>   The `lsst-sphgeom`_ PyPI package is a C++ package but can not be used to build ``afw`` because the include files and shared libraries are not part of the installation.

Author: I don't think the shared library is included as such. There is no libsphgeom to link against -- it's the full python dylib. There are definitely no include files.

  Only the Python interface is available.

Configuring the Package
=======================

All the configuration for a modern Python package lives in a file called ``pyproject.toml``.
There are a number of sections that need to be created for ``pip`` to work properly.

The Build Requirements
----------------------

.. code-block:: toml

  [build-system]
  requires = ["setuptools", "lsst-versions >= 1.3.0"]
  build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

This section tells ``pip`` what to install before the build process can even begin.
Usually you will find that a package will use ``setuptools_scm`` to determine the version number.

> This doesn't really work for science pipelines packages since tags are applied by the pipelines build procedure and can not be set by the individual package owner.

Author: Yes, if someone started their own tagging scheme starting at v1000 or something then that would work, even if it looked a bit odd on PyPI with "older" versions using the pipelines version number still being pushed.

> This doesn't really work for science pipelines packages since tags are applied by the pipelines build procedure and can not be set by the individual package owner.

Author: I've added some new text on options for semantic versioning.

        "Programming Language :: Python :: 3.10",
        "Programming Language :: Python :: 3.11",
    ]
    keywords = ["lsst"]
    dependencies = [
        "lsst-utils",
        "importlib_resources",
    ]
    dynamic = ["version"]
    requires-python = ">=3.10.0"

The Rubin DM convention is that science pipelines packages that are to be distributed on `PyPI`_ should include the ``lsst-`` prefix in the name.
This differs from the EUPS naming convention where the ``lsst`` is implicit.
For example, the ``daf_butler`` EUPS package has a python distribution name of ``lsst-daf-butler``.
Middleware packages use a dual license for distribution, with the `PyPI`_ package declaring the BSD 3-clause license.
Most science pipelines packages use the GPLv3 license and for those packages the ``pyproject.toml`` should use:

.. code-block:: toml

    license = {text = "GPLv3+ License"}
    classifiers = [
      "License :: OSI Approved :: GNU General Public License v3 or later (GPLv3+)",
    ]

Every Rubin DM science pipelines package should be owned by the special DM account and that should always be included in the ``authors`` section.
Additional authors can be included if required.

> The ``dependencies`` section can only refer to packages that are available on `PyPI`_ since this is the section that will be read during ``pip install``.

Reviewer: You should note that it must include packages that would otherwise be provided by rubin-env.

Setuptools Configuration
------------------------

> For ``setuptools`` builds additional configuration is needed so that the python files and data files can be located.

Reviewer: This begs the question as to which packages should use `setuptools`, which should not, and what the alternatives are.

Author: Maybe I rephrase to something like "In this documentation we will use `setuptools`  for the build" or something.

For example, in ``daf_butler`` there is this configuration:

.. code-block:: toml

    [tool.setuptools.packages.find]
    where = ["python"]

    [tool.setuptools]
    zip-safe = true
    license-files = ["COPYRIGHT", "LICENSE", "bsd_license.txt", "gpl-v3.0.txt"]

    [tool.setuptools.package-data]
    "lsst.daf.butler" = ["py.typed", "configs/*.yaml", "configs/*/*.yaml"]

    [tool.setuptools.dynamic]
    version = { attr = "lsst_versions.get_lsst_version" }

This tells ``setuptools`` that the python files are in a ``python/`` directory and what additional non-python files should be included in the distribution.

The license-files section should reflect the specific needs of your package.

When making a `PyPI`_ distribution, the package should work without relying on the EUPS ``$PACKAGE_DIR`` variable being set.

> This means that any supplementary data such as those that would go in a ``config/`` or ``policy/`` directory should instead be included inside the ``python/`` directory and be accessed using the standard package resources APIs.

Reviewer: Link to the package resources APIs, please.

> These files must then be listed explicitly in the ``package-data`` section of the configuration file.

Reviewer: Why is `py.typed` in that list?

Author: Is that a rhetorical question where you are wanting me to explain why it's there?

.. warning::

  Currently ``pex_config`` does not understand how to read a config from a package using package resources.
  If configs are to be read they can not be read using the usual ``lsst.utils.getPackageDir`` API and must instead use `importlib.resources` APIs directly.
  We are planning to make this simpler by adding native support into ``pex_config``.

Using GitHub Actions
====================

If a package is pip-installable it is likely that you will want to build the package in a GitHub action and run the associated tests.
If your package depends on other science pipelines packages you will want to install those directly from GitHub from the ``main`` branch since there is no guarantee that `PyPI`_ will have the right version.
The easiest way to do this is to write a ``requirements.txt`` file which has the direct dependencies that should be installed by the build script.

> This file is a simple text file listing packages and versions.

Reviewer: It may be good to note that this does duplicate information from `pyproject.toml`, and both must be maintained.

For example, the ``requirements.txt`` in the ``daf_relation`` package looks like:

.. code-block::

  git+https://github.com/lsst/utils@main#egg=lsst-utils
  sqlalchemy >= 1.4

The first line tells ``pip`` to install the dependency directly from GitHub.
The second line is a standard `PyPI`_ dependency.
These can be installed by running:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pip install -r requirements.txt

and then the package can be installed with:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pip install --no-deps .

Where this will skip the dependency check and install the package directly.
When developing multiple packages at the same time it is possible to change the ``requirements.txt`` file to point at a specific ticket branch rather than ``main``.

> There are checkers available that can block merging if such a change has been made.

Reviewer: Where are these checkers?

Author: At the moment not reusable workflows. They are in the middleware packages.

All science pipeline packages on `PyPI`_ must be owned by the Rubin DM `PyPI`_ account attached to ``dm-admin@lists.lsst.org``.

The `PyPI`_ upload can be configured in the same GitHub action that builds the package and tests it.
Usually it will block on the successful completion of that phase and then only trigger if a tag is being added.

A full example can be seen below:

.. code-block:: yaml

  pypi:

    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    needs: [build_and_test]
    if: startsWith(github.ref, 'refs/tags/')
    permissions:
      id-token: write

    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
        with:
          # Need to clone everything to embed the version.
          fetch-depth: 0

      - name: Set up Python
        uses: actions/setup-python@v4
        with:
          python-version: "3.11"

      - name: Install dependencies
        run: |
          python -m pip install --upgrade pip
          pip install --upgrade setuptools wheel build

      - name: Build and create distribution
        run: |
          python -m build --skip-dependency-check

      - name: Upload
        uses: pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish@release/v1

> For the upload to work `PyPI`_ must be preconfigured to expect uploads from this specific GitHub action using a `trusted publisher`_ mechanism.

Reviewer: Who does this?  How does the author request it?

Author: I was wondering myself how you can warn pypi that a package called lsst-x is about to turn up.

The Rubin DM convention is that Science Pipelines packages that are to be distributed on `PyPI`_ should include the ``lsst-`` prefix in the name.
This differs from the EUPS naming convention where the ``lsst`` is implicit.
For example, the ``daf_butler`` EUPS package has a python distribution name of ``lsst-daf-butler``.
Middleware packages use a dual license for distribution, with the `PyPI`_ package declaring the BSD 3-clause license.
Most Science Pipelines packages use the GPLv3 license and for those packages the ``pyproject.toml`` should use:

.. code-block:: toml

    license = {text = "GPLv3+ License"}
    classifiers = [
      "License :: OSI Approved :: GNU General Public License v3 or later (GPLv3+)",
    ]

Every Rubin DM Science Pipelines package should be owned by the special DM account and that should always be included in the ``authors`` section.
Additional authors can be included if required.

The ``dependencies`` section can only refer to packages that are available on `PyPI`_ since this is the section that will be read during ``pip install``.
It should include all Python packages that would normally be included as part of the ``rubin-env`` Conda environment.

> Do not include optional packages in this list or packages that are only needed to run the test code.
> 
> This can be achieved with something like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Do not include optional packages in this list or packages that are only needed to run the test code.
Instead, add a separate item like the following:
```

.. code-block:: toml

  [project.optional-dependencies]
  test = [
      "pytest >= 3.2",
      "numpy >= 1.17",
      "matplotlib >= 3.0.3",
      "pyarrow >= 0.16",
      "pandas >= 1.0",
  ]

> and would be installed automatically if ``pip`` is called with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These optional packages would be installed automatically if ``pip`` is called with:
```

For example, in ``daf_butler`` there is this configuration:

.. code-block:: toml

    [tool.setuptools.packages.find]
    where = ["python"]

    [tool.setuptools]
    zip-safe = true
    license-files = ["COPYRIGHT", "LICENSE", "bsd_license.txt", "gpl-v3.0.txt"]

    [tool.setuptools.package-data]
    "lsst.daf.butler" = ["py.typed", "configs/*.yaml", "configs/*/*.yaml"]

    [tool.setuptools.dynamic]
    version = { attr = "lsst_versions.get_lsst_version" }

This tells ``setuptools`` that the python files are in a ``python/`` directory and what additional non-python files should be included in the distribution.

The license-files section should reflect the specific needs of your package.

When making a `PyPI`_ distribution, the package should work without relying on the EUPS ``$PACKAGE_DIR`` variable being set.
This means that any supplementary data such as those that would go in a ``config/`` or ``policy/`` directory should instead be included inside the ``python/`` directory and be accessed using the standard package resources APIs (such as `importlib.resources` or ``lsst.resources.ResourcePath``).

> These files must then be listed explicitly in the ``package-data`` section of the configuration file, as can be shown in the above example (the ``py.typed`` file tells Mypy that type annotations are defined for this package).

Reviewer: Now that I understand that `package-data` includes _all non-python files_, `py.typed` doesn't need to be called out specially.

The easiest way to do this is to write a ``requirements.txt`` file which has the direct dependencies that should be installed by the build script.
This file is a simple text file listing packages and versions, and will likely duplicate information found in the ``pyproject.toml`` file.

For example, the ``requirements.txt`` in the ``daf_relation`` package looks like:

.. code-block::

  git+https://github.com/lsst/utils@main#egg=lsst-utils
  sqlalchemy >= 1.4

The first line tells ``pip`` to install the dependency directly from GitHub.
The second line is a standard `PyPI`_ dependency.
These can be installed by running:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pip install -r requirements.txt

and then the package can be installed with:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pip install --no-deps .

Where this will skip the dependency check and install the package directly.
When developing multiple packages at the same time it is possible to change the ``requirements.txt`` file to point at a specific ticket branch rather than ``main``.

> There are checkers available that can block merging if such a change has been made, an example can be found in the ``daf_butler`` repository named `do_not_merge.yaml`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are checkers available that can block merging if such a change has been made; an example can be found in the ``daf_butler`` repository named `do_not_merge.yaml`_.
```
